# ExternalPolitics

## Aragorn: Matrimonial Aliance

This king's marriage was perhaps one of the first great successes of Portuguese foreign policy. Denis starts negotiations with Pedro III of Aragon, to marry his daughter, Isabel, who at the same time would be claimed by ambassadors of the kings of France and England. Isabel was an extremely valuable party since her figure was renowned for the best qualities, and also the strategic importance of Aragon, both from a political and economic point of view, since Pedro III himself embarked on a Mediterranean policy, starting with the conquest of the Italian island of Sicily (which constituted the kingdom of Trinacria), as a result of the defense of the rights of his wife, the last descendant of the German imperial house of Hohenstaufen in southern Italy. Peter's successors would continue this policy of Mediterranean expansion and domination.

Thanks to the efforts of his attorneys and vassals João Velho, João Martins, and Vasco Pires, he negotiated the matrimonial clauses and was in charge of receiving the bride as a gift, a right that had been granted to them on November 12, 1280. Pedro III made the decision by the Portuguese king, according to a letter of February 11, 1282, in which the 20-year-old Portuguese king and the 11-year-old Aragonese princess were married. Denis donated twelve castles and three villages to his wife. At that time, Denis would find himself in Trancoso, a town that he would also donate to Isabel on June 26, 1282. It was also in this town that the de facto wedding took place, remaining there until the first days of August.

## Leão and Castela: Definition of frontiers

The first years of Denis' reign saw the civil war in Castile, which pits Alfonso X the Wise against Prince Sancho. In April 1282 Denis sends an embassy of condolence to Castile on the death of the troubadour king. However, the situation between Portugal and Leão-Castle was not entirely peaceful: since the conquest of the Algarve, both kings of the west of the Peninsula have claimed the title of King of the Algarve, a fact that bothered the Portuguese king a lot.

Despite this, relations between the two kingdoms were still stable, having even allied in December 1288 against Aragon, who fought between the spring and summer of 1289. The real break came in 1293 when Denis protects the Castilian magnate João Nunes de Lara. The situation seems to get worse when Sancho arranges for his son Fernando the hand of Princess Isabel, daughter of Philip IV of France.

In his will, Sancho IV of Castile had determined that the towns of Moura and Serpa, and the castles of Mourão and Noudar, as well as the castles and towns of Arronches and Aracena, unfairly taken from Portugal and found themselves unduly, should be returned to the Portuguese kingdom. retained by the Castilians. The Castilian king dies on April 25, 1295, and on October 20, these goods are officially handed over to Portugal, more specifically to the crown porter, João Rodrigues, in the name of Denis. However, it would be the knight Nuno Fernandes Cogominho who would come to assume his possession in the name of the king.

During the youth of Ferdinand IV of Castile, who was only nine, the political turmoil in Castile was accentuated. The regency fell to the mother of the new monarch, Maria de Molina, being contested by the infants João, lord of Valencia de Campos, brother of Sancho IV and Henrique de Castile. The Senator, brother of Afonso X. It was up to João to try to get help from Denis. In this way, the Guard moved to agree with a pact, in which Denis would support John's claim to the throne of Leon, extinct in 1230 by Fernando III of Castile. This agreement was ratified on October 4, 1295.

Portugal ends up declaring war on Castile, having it announced in the courts of Valladolid. The news worried the Castilians since they were fully aware of the difficulties involved in a war with Portugal. Thus, the Castilian nobles wrote to Denis, on May 12, 1297, to obtain his support in the fight against Infante João, clearly ignoring that the king of Portugal already supported him. The latter goes to Toro, where he proposes to Maria de Molina the recognition of the rebellious infant as king of Galicia, a proposal that she refused. With his attempts frustrated, Denis returns to Portugal, staying in Sabugal for the entire month of August and the first half of September.

On September 12, 1297, the Treaty of Alcanizes was celebrated, in the Castilian town of the same name. The clauses established Portugal's rights to the ownership of several castles in Ribacoa and the castle of Monforte. Other castles located in present-day Alentejo became at this time a definitive part of Portugal (except Olivença): Campo Maior, Ouguela and S. Félix dos Galegos. Added to this were the castles of Moura and Serpa, which, despite having been given up, had not yet been returned. Several of these properties, such as Serpa or Moura, had been conquered by Alfonso X of Castile from the Portuguese during the 1245-47 war, which pitted Alfonso III of Portugal against his brother Sancho II.

In turn, Portugal renounced the castles of Aroche and Aracena, and Valencia de Alcántara, Ferreira and Esparregal, in possession of the Order of Alcântara.
The treaty would establish peace with Castile, a foreseen peace of 40 years, of friendship and mutual defense, defining the current borders between the two Iberian countries. The peace and alliance were officially sealed by the combination of the marriages of the infants Constança and Afonso, sons of Denis, with King Fernando IV of Castile and Infanta Beatriz, sons of the queen regent, respectively.
